[[directory-of-visualizations]]
Directory of visualizations
---------------------------

This chapter provides a quick visual overview of the various plots and
charts that are commonly used to visualize data. It is meant both to
serve as a table of contents, in case you are looking for a particular
visualization whose name you may not know, and as a source of
inspiration, if you need to find alternatives to the figures you
routinely make.

[[amounts]]
Amounts
~~~~~~~

The most common approach to visualizing amounts (i.e., numerical values
shown for some set of categories) is using bars, either vertically or
horizontally arranged (Chapter @ref(visualizing-amounts)). However,
instead of using bars, we can also place dots at the location where the
corresponding bar would end (Chapter @ref(visualizing-amounts)).

If there are two or more sets of categories for which we want to show
amounts, we can group or stack the bars (Chapter
@ref(visualizing-amounts)). We can also map the categories onto the _x_
and _y_ axis and show amounts by color, via a heatmap (Chapter
@ref(visualizing-amounts)).

[[distributions]]
Distributions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Histograms and density plots (Chapter @ref(histograms-density-plots))
provide the most intuitive visualizations of a distribution, but both
require arbitrary parameter choices and can be misleading. Cumulative
densities and q-q plots (Chapter @ref(ecdf-qq)) always represent the
data faithfully but can be more difficult to interpret.

Boxplots, violin plots, jittered points, and sina plots are useful when
we want to visualize many distributions at once and/or if we are
primarily interested in overall shifts among the distributions (Chapter
@ref(boxplots-violins-vertical)). Stacked histograms and overlapping
densities allow a more in-depth comparison of a smaller number of
distributions, though stacked histograms can be difficult to interpret
and are best avoided (Chapter @ref(multiple-histograms-densities)).
Ridgeline plots can be a useful alternative to violin plots and are
often useful when visualizing very large numbers of distributions or
changes in distributions over time (Chapter
@ref(boxplots-violins-horizontal)).

[[proportions]]
Proportions
~~~~~~~~~~~

Proportions can be visualized as pie charts, side-by-side bars, or
stacked bars (Chapter @ref(visualizing-proportions)), and as in the case
for amounts, bars can be arranged either vertically or horizontally. Pie
charts emphasize that the individual parts add up to a whole and
highlight simple fractions. However, the individual pieces are more
easily compared in side-by-side bars. Stacked bars look awkward for a
single set of proportions, but can be useful when comparing multiple
sets of proportions (see below).

When visualizing multiple sets of proportions or changes in proportions
across conditions, pie charts tend to be space-inefficient and often
obscure relationships. Grouped bars work well as long as the number of
conditions compared is moderate, and stacked bars can work for large
numbers of conditions. Stacked densities (Chapter
@ref(visualizing-proportions)) are appropriate when the proportions
change along a continuous variable.

When proportions are specified according to multiple grouping variables,
then mosaic plots, treemaps, or parallel sets are useful visualization
approaches (Chapter @ref(nested-proportions)). Mosaic plots assume that
every level of one grouping variable can be combined with every level of
another grouping variable, whereas treemaps do not make such an
assumption. Treemaps work well even if the subdivisions of one group are
entirely distinct from the subdivisions of another. Parallel sets work
better than either mosaic plots or treemaps when there are more than two
grouping variables.

[[x--y-relationships]]
_x_--_y_ relationships
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Scatter plots represent the archetypical visualization when we want to
show one quantitative variable relative to another (Chapter
@ref(associations-scatterplots)). If we have three quantitative
variables, we can map one onto the dot size, creating a variant of the
scatter plot called bubble chart. For paired data, where the variables
along the _x_ and the _y_ axes are measured in the same units, it is
generally helpful to add a line indicating _x_ = _y_ (Chapter
@ref(associations-paired-data)). Paired data can also be shown as a
slope graph of paired points connected by straight lines (Chapter
@ref(associations-paired-data)).

For large numbers of points, regular scatterplots can become
uninformative due to overplotting. In this case, contour lines, 2D bins,
or hex bins may provide an alternative (Chapter
@ref(overlapping-points)). When we want to visualize more than two
quantities, on the other hand, we may choose to plot correlation
coefficients in the form of a correlogram instead of the underlying raw
data (Chapter @ref(associations-correlograms)).

When the _x_ axis represents time or a strictly increasing quantity such
as a treatment dose, we commonly draw line graphs (Chapter
@ref(time-series)). If we have a temporal sequence of two response
variables, we draw a connected scatter plot where we first plot the two
response variables in a scatter plot and then connect dots corresponding
to adjacent time points (Chapter @ref(time-series-connected-scatter)).
We use smooth lines to represent trends in a larger dataset (_chapter to
be written_).

[[uncertainty]]
Uncertainty
~~~~~~~~~~~
